[Music]
we are facing each other both producing
a continuous vocal sound we slowly build
up the tension our faces coming closer
together until we are screaming into
each other's open mouths
[Music]
a
within the Realms of performance art
Marina Abramovich is undoubtedly one of
the most celebrated and controversial
female artists yet known her work has
captivated and shocked many for its
intensity its rawness and its
willingness to push the boundaries of
human endurance although she began her
career as a painter in time she would
turn her attention to performance art in
the early 1970s where she would start
exploring themes of a body pain and
Trauma she's been known to put herself
in extreme physical and emotional states
testing a limits of what a body and mind
could withstand as well as the viewing
public would interact over the years
Abramovich has continued to create
challenging and Innovative work she has
performed in some of the world's most
prestigious museums and Galleries and
her work has been featured in numerous
films and documentaries and continues to
do so to this day together we'll be
taking an intimate look at abramovich's
life from her early childhood to the
woman she is today as well as discussing
her work from a rarely heard of to were
most infamous in hopes to understand
what drives her to create such extreme
and challenging art just how exactly has
Marina Abramovich become such a complex
and fascinating figure how did she
become a Pioneer in the field of
performance art and how has her work
challenged and inspired audiences for
decades please don't forget to subscribe
and hit the notification Bell to see
more content on the weird and wonderful
side of Art and with that said welcome
to another another video everyone this
is the story and performance art of
Marina
Abramovich Marina Abramovich was born on
November 30th 1946 in Belgrade
Yugoslavia now in modern-day Serbia
described by her as a dark place young
Marina's Hometown and country were under
Communist dictatorship rule with General
Joseph Britto in charge she often looked
back on her surroundings as being
terribly depressing and oppressive
however she would also consider her and
her family somewhat luckier than
most abramovich's parents were both
Yugoslav partisans during World War II
who were both awarded High positions in
the postwar government and celebrated as
war
heroes according to Abramovich her
parents first meeting could easily be
described as nothing short of a dramatic
fairy tale in the midst of terrible
Bloodshed her mother Dena was a major in
the army fighting on the front line and
protecting wounded
partisans during a German Advance she
came down with tyus and was lying on
unconscious among the badly wounded with
a high fever and covered in a
blanket she was close to death until
Marina's father voen would come across
her dying body struck by a beauty he
quickly carried her to the nearby
Village where the peasants would nurse
her back to health within just 6 months
she was back on the front line saving
yet more injured
solders one of which would be none other
than voen himself horribly wounded and
bleeding to death instantly recognizing
the man who rescued her she sprung to
action but there was no available blood
for
transfusions however by some miracle she
discovered she had the exact same blood
type as him and so would give him her
own blood saving his life as he had
saved
hers after the war they crossed paths
once again and married not long after
her father worked with State security
and the elite guard whilst her mother
directed an Institute that supervised
historic monuments as well as becoming
the head of the Museum of Art and the
revolution in Belgrade when Marina was
born her mother was leading a party
meeting when her water broke to emphasiz
just how committed to their political
positions her parents were Marina
claimed that her mother refused to go to
the hospital to give birth until the
meeting was over Marina was also born
prematurely resulting in a difficult
birth the placenta did not come out
completely causing her mother to develop
sepsis once again she was nearly on the
verge of death and had to stay for a
long period at the hospital until she
recovered over the years while her
parents continue to work committedly to
their careers Abramovich would hardly
receive any parental Care by either of
them resulting in a first 6 years being
under the care of her maternal
grandmother Melissa
rosich her grandmother was a deeply
spiritual woman a staunch devotee of the
Orthodox church and abramovich's early
childhood was deeply influenced by a
grandmother's faith when Abramovich
turned six her younger brother vamir was
born and she would subsequently moved
back in with her parents into her family
apartment but in truth the worst was yet
to come it's worth remembering that for
the first 6 years since Marina was born
her parents at this point were
practically Strang to her only ever
visiting her and her grandmother once a
week they were also increasingly
distancing from each other as a mared
couple possibly since before Marina was
even born despite their love story and
the initial attraction to each other
during the war their marriage was
falling apart little by little with each
passing year dissolving into constant
fights that would only become
increasingly
intense this was attributed to many
causes one being the polar opposite
backgrounds and interests for example
her mother was from a wealthy and
well-educated family with refined tastes
for the Arts and who view communism as a
more abstract idealistic and even
fashionable idea her father on the other
hands was from a more modest and
self-made military family communist
through and through who enjoyed more
Simple Pleasures such as drinking with
his friends it would not be long until
the romance faded completely only for
them to realize how little and common
they actually shared with each other
though the further you dive into how
Abramovich described her childhood it's
more than likely that the main strain of
their marriage was caused by her father
and his love for women very often he was
unfaithful to Dena making their
crumbling relationship even worse and
her confrontations with him more
violent sadly Marina too would suffer
frequent violence at the hands of her
mother as well
almost on a daily basis she was beaten
and slapped by her mother for even the
slightest mistakes or the most minor
offenses over time this would develop a
specific phobia within Marina a fear of
her own blood from the beatings her nose
would bleed constantly one time when she
lost her first baby tooth the bleeding
wouldn't stop for 3 months fearing that
she may have had leukemia her parents
took her to the hosital hospital where
she was diagnosed for having a rare
blood disorder and she had to stay at
the hospital for almost a year this
period according to her was the happiest
time of her childhood quote everyone in
my family was now nice to me they
brought me good presents and everybody
in the hospital was kind to me it was
Paradise the doctors continued to do
tests and discovered that what I had was
not leukemia but something more
mysterious maybe some kind of
psychosomatic reaction to my physical
abuse I was given all kinds of
treatments then I went back home and the
slapping and beating continued but maybe
a little less frequently than before end
quote another method of punishment
included a dark hidden closet known as a
placard that she would sometimes be
locked in for hours Abramovich would
give a morbid recount on her experiences
with this closet as follows I was afraid
of a dark but this placard was filled
with ghosts spiritual presence luminous
beings shapeless and Silent not at all
frightening I would talk to them it felt
completely normal to me that they were
there they were simply part of my
reality my life from the moment I would
turn on the light they would vanish end
quote
perhaps due to her mother's background
in the Army young Marina was expected to
endure punishments without question
expected to be toughened up into a
soldier like her but if Abramovich
describes how her mother took complete
military style control of her it would
be quite the opposite between Marina and
her father
voen according to Marina her father
never punished or beat her and this
naturally Drew Marina closer to him
quote
I remember he used to take me to
carnivals and buy me sweets when he took
me out it was rarely just the two of us
he was usually with one of his
girlfriends and the girlfriend would buy
me wonderful presents which I would
bring back home so happy I would say oh
the beautiful blonde lady bought me all
this and my mother would throw the
presents straight out of a window end
quote by this time in her childhood the
marriage for between voen and Dena was
as good as over and the more Marina
loved her father for his tenderness the
harsher the punishments were from her
mother however if there was one thing
left between Marina and her mother that
would leave more of a positive impact on
her during her childhood and throughout
the rest of her life it would be her
eagerness and willingness to learn new
skills within different cultures and art
forms which her mother greatly
encouraged from an early age Marina took
piano lessons and learned both English
and French on a regular basis thanks to
her parents habit of pushing her
daughter to read certain literature
Marina would also find escapism in
reading books at times only ever coming
out of a bedroom to eat then she would
head back in a room spending each hour
of every day reading page after
page but most significantly of course
young Marina took a particularly Keen
interest in art and her parents
particularly her mother who adored the
Arts would actively nurture this side to
her personality to a point where Marina
would even have her own Studio complete
with a proper easel Marina would
describe how her first paintings
consisted mostly of her dreams which
Marina remembered very well and would
write down later to be painted she
recounted only using two colors each
time she painted a deep green and night
blue quote I was always attracted to
these two colors I can't quite say why
for me dreams are green and blue I took
some old curtain and made a long robe
for myself in those precise colors the
colors of my dreams end
quote as the years went by Marina's
father would buy her a set of oil paints
and arrange a painting lesson with a
partisan friend of his an artist named
filo philipovich who painted abstract
landscapes
during the first lesson together he cut
out a piece of canvas on the floor
opened a can of glue and threw it on the
canvas he then proceeded to add a bit of
sand some yellow red and black pigments
to Marina's surprise he then poured half
a liter of gasoline onto the canvas L A
match and everything
exploded afterwards he turned to Marina
and said quote this is a
sunset after he left and the remnants
had dried Marina pinned it to the wall
totally in awe of it however after
returning home to it after going on a
holiday with her family to her
disappointment the August Sun had dried
out the artwork so badly that the color
was gone and the sand ashes and pigments
had all fallen on the floor the sunset
had quite simply
vanished this incident left an
incredibly profound effect on her
whether she knew it at the time or not
but certainly looking back on this event
later in life Marina realized that the
end result proved to be entirely
insignificant when compared to what
truly captivated her the most which was
the process it was the actual making of
the art that left the lasting impact
rather than what was left behind the
journey instead of a
destination perhaps this event alone
would be what truly motivated her as
time went on to eventually step away
from the paints and the easel to head
directly towards the beckoning call of
performance art perhaps if it weren't
for this one faithful meeting arranged
by her father Marina's life would have
never taken shape as it has done so to
this day
[Music]
by the time Marina reached her
adolescence both within and outside a
family home life continued to be a
terrible challenge for her often she and
her brother were forbidden to bring
friends home due to their mother's
germophobia resulting in them being very
shy and bullied by the other kids
because of it quote my teenage years
were desperately all and unhappy in my
mind I was the ugliest kid in my school
extraordinarily ugly I was thin and tall
and the kids called me giraffe I had to
sit in the back of my class because I
was so tall but I could not see the
board so I could not get good grades
finally they figured out I needed
glasses we're not talking about normal
glasses these were the ugly kinds that
came from communist countries with thick
lenses and heavy frames so I would try
to break them by sitting on them or by
putting them in a window and
accidentally closing it end
quote as her teen years progressed the
Loveless marriage of her parents and the
ever tense atmosphere it created in a
Family household not only continued but
seemed to be reaching a terrible
breaking point when Marina turned 17 her
parents threw a huge party and dinner to
celebrate their anniversary 18 years of
supposedly happy years of marriage but
after everybody left the chaos started
again Marina remembered her father
uncharacteristically walking into the
kitchen to clean up starting with the 12
champag glasses that were waiting to be
cleaned turning to her he said quote
let's wash the champagne glasses you dry
but within moments his father broke the
first glass he picked up to wash as her
mother walked in and she exploded with
rage quote they had just spent several
hours pretending to be happy as she
built up all of that anger and
bitterness she saw the broken glass and
started yelling at my father about
everything about how clumsy he was and
what a disaster their marriage was and
how many women he had slept with he just
stood there and I watched silently
holding this little towel in my hand
she yelled and yelled and my father said
nothing he didn't move it felt like a
Becket play after many minutes of her
lamenting about all the sh in their
marriage she stopped because he was not
responding finally he said to her are
you finished when she replied yes he
picked up the other champagne glasses
and one by one he smashed all 11 on the
floor I can't hear this 11 more times he
said and he walked out of the house this
was the beginning of the end end
quote sure enough Marina's father and
closest Elder aside from her grandmother
left for good not long after this very
incident this affected Marina so much
that she was overcome with grief and
suffered a nervous
breakdown although her father had gone
the memory of her first painting lesson
that he had arranged for her years prior
still energized her mind to see new ways
of experiencing and indeed creating art
and art by this time had truly become
her Sanctuary she continued to paint at
her Studio at home until another
profound experience happened to her that
would again encourage her to see art as
more than just paint on
canvas one day when lying on the grass
and looking up at the clear sky above
her she noticed 12 military jets fly
over her leaving white Trails behind
them quote I watched in Fascination as
the trail slowly disappeared and the sky
once more became a perfect blue all at
once it occurred to me why paint why
should I limit myself to two Dimensions
when I can make art from anything at all
fire water the human body anything there
was was something like a click in my
mind I realized that being an artist
means having immense Freedom if I wanted
to create something from dust or rubbish
I could do it it was an unbelievably
freeing feeling especially from someone
coming from a home where there was
almost no
Freedom end
quote in 1965 Marina enrolled in the
painting program of the Academy of Fine
Arts in Belgrade eager to begin her life
a new hone in on her creativity and in
many ways find Freedom from the shackles
of her militant
mother however even in her young
adulthood whilst living under the roof
of her mother she still had to obey many
of her strict rules including a curfew
of no later than 10 p.m. which would
continue right up to her late
20s as Marina continued to paint the
less she seemed to enjoy it she had not
discovered performance art yet but
nevertheless she couldn't help but feel
something was missing it wasn't until
she started completing paintings that
were instead less accurate on a
technical level and instead more
abstract and deliberately ambiguous that
she eventually felt she was reaching
closer to a
breakthrough pictures that made the
viewer as she describes it a
participants in the artistic experience
pictures that demanded that imagination
take place and that opened the door to
her
unconscious all the while she began to
meet light-minded students in the
academy who shared her disillusionment
of the everchanging and increasingly
corrupt communist Nation they found
themselves in and who too wanted to see
beyond the limits of paint and find ways
to put life itself into art she would
actively join political student
campaigns and protests and attend
meetings for hours at a time discussing
art and how it could evolve from the
conservative ways that their professors
were teaching it during this periods of
the 1960s especially in the west
everything seemed to be changing
drastically not just within politics and
popular music but within art as well no
longer was Art seen as merely a
commodity by new emerging artists but
due to a surge and growing interest of
avangard experimentation New Concepts
such as performance art were beginning
to Garner wider attention especially
amongst younger crowds within art
schools and art scenes and the Academy
of Fine Arts in Belgrade would be no
exception as these new ideas began to
leak into Europe Abramovich and her
closest classmates paid close attention
to the new art movements emerging in
America and she in particular was
eagerly drawn to the performance side of
artistic
expression finally Marina had found a
viable opportunity to work with whatever
surrounded her and unit it with her
creative output and emotional
expression however from the very
beginning it was met with almost
complete rejection although avangard
ideas were continuing to filter into
Yugoslavia The Establishment still
firmly rejected most of them including
performance art each of her ideas to
create her first solo performance were
continuously rejected by by the Belgrade
Youth Center it would not be until the
start of her 70s when she completed her
studies in Belgrade and enrolled at the
Academy of Fine Arts in Zagreb as a
post-graduate that her ideas and
Concepts were beginning to receive
further
encouragement not to mention that for
the first time in her life she was
living outside of her home City away
from a grip of her overbearing mother
both Freedom within art and life in
general now lay at her feet
in spite of this in 1971 after finishing
her studies in Zagreb she returned to
Belgrade to be reunited with her lover
and fellow conceptual artist Nesha
palovich who shared her passion for new
ideas in art and would soon become her
husband between 1971 and
1976 after returning to her home City in
1971 in October Abramovich took part in
an exhibition at the student Cultural
Center planned as a Counterpoint to the
official October Salon exhibition
organized by the government it was here
that she exhibited her first immaterial
artwork and by now she had all but
abandoned painting Al together by 1973
Marina was fully immersed into a new and
exciting medium of performance art and
constantly chasing new ideas and
concepts of how to express herself and
in particular of how to follow her
desire to capture the brutality and
violence that inspired her greatly maybe
it was this Burning Desire that
eventually led her to her first
groundbreaking and controversial
performance later that same year the
first of a series of intense
performances that would later be known
as the Rhythm series called rhythm 10 in
Edinburgh
Scotland a performance of one artist 12
knives and the start of what Abramovic
would be forever famous for which was
the Relentless endurance of a human body
when pushed to its absolute limits
[Music]
at the beginning of the
1970s after marrying and completing her
studies in art Marina Abramovich was
taking her first steps as a full-time
artist though very little was changing
in her life whilst remaining in her
hometown of Belgrade in
Yugoslavia Marina still remained close
to her former classmates from art school
and continued to do various local
exhibitions with them mostly within the
student Cultural Center in Belgrade
experimenting with visual effects and
audio recordings as well as putting her
body through strange displays such as
wrapping her entire body in tape that
would gner a wide range of reactions
from mesmerized to straight up
repulsed however one visiting Creator
from Scotland was about to propel
Marina's position within the art World
further than she could have ever
anticipated Richard DeMarco a Scottish
artist and promoter of the Visual and
Performing Arts was visiting Bel gr
looking for fresh ideas for the next
Edinburgh Art Festival after a fairly
uneventful trip word eventually got
round to him about a small group of
postgraduate art students Marina
Abramovich included who were doing
something far more outlandish and
experimental compared to what the
painting and sculpting scene could offer
with only one night left in Belgrade he
invited them to his hotel room to meet
them before traveling home the next day
despite a fruitful meeting and an
invitation for the group to attend the
Edinburgh Festival the Yugoslavian
government officials escorting him
bluntly refused claiming that this kind
of art would not appropriately represent
the culture of the country following
this DeMarco decided to formally invite
the group to make their own way to
Scotland to attend the festival
thankfully Marina had saved up enough
money to make the trip and she didn't
look back this was the opportunity she
had been waiting
for after arriving in Edinburgh she was
invited to stay with friends of DeMarco
and she quickly got to work planning a
performance for the festival and already
she was beginning to feel the pressure
this was her very first trip to the West
as an artist suddenly surrounded by some
of the world's most infamous conceptual
artists that would even make Marina's
most shocking work look tamed by
comparison such as a team of performers
that included Gunter Bruce who just a
few years prior at the University of
Vienna had conducted a performance that
involved urinating into a glass then
proceeding to cover his body in his own
excrement singing the Austrian national
anthem whilst basically pleasuring
himself never before had Marina felt
like such a small fish in a very large
and unpredictable Pond but nevertheless
she knew she was brought here for a
reason she knew she had something to
offer that was different and it was in
fact her fortitude in the face of fear
her composure in the face of
intimidation and even extreme danger
that would eventually lead her to a very
first installment of arguably her most
notorious body of
[Music]
work okay so before I get into the
details of r from 10 I need to own up to
quite an embarrassing mistake I made in
part one of this ongoing documentary
towards the end of the last video I
accidentally said that Rhythm 10
involved 12 knives instead of 10 which
is straight up Incorrect and I'm still
baffled as to how I said that and didn't
even notice it during editing maybe 12
and 10 sounded similar to me at the time
I don't know but I thought I'd mention
this now just because the number of
knives that Marina used is quite
significant to the concept and even the
very title of the performance so now
that that's hopefully cleared up any
potential confusion let's
continue on the floor of the gymnasium
of Melville College one of the sites of
the Edinburgh Festival Marina Abramovich
unrolled a big sheet of heavy white
paper and on top she would rest a
collection of 10 knives of various sizes
with two tape recorders set aside the
stage was now set for rhythm 10 even by
Marina's own Mission she knew what she
was about to do was completely unhinged
and would retell this event in quite a
gripping way quote Rhythm 10 was
absolutely crazy it was based on a
drinking game played by Russian and
Yugoslav peasants you spread your
fingers out on a wooden bar or table and
stabbed down a sharp knife fast in the
spaces between your
fingers every time you miss and cut
yourself you have to take of a drink the
drunker you get the more likely you are
to stab yourself like Russian Roulette
is a game of bravery and foolishness and
despair and darkness the perfect Slavic
game beforehand I was so nervous that I
was scared I would get one of my
incapacitating whole body migraines I
could hardly breathe from the idea that
I was going to do this but I was also
serious about what I was about to do
when 100% committed I was so serious
about everything then yet I think I
needed this gravity much later on I read
a statement of Bruce Nan's art is a
matter of life and death it sounds
melodramatic but it's so true this was
exactly how it was for me even at the
beginning art was life and death there
was nothing else it was so serious and
so
necessary with a big crowd watching I
knelt down on the paper and turned on
one of the tape recorders I had been
terrified beforehand but the second I
began my fear
evaporated the space I occupied was safe
end
quote as the performance was in full
swing Marina brought the knives down
between her fingers on her left hand as
fast as she could and of course because
she was going fast every once in a while
she would miss just slightly and Nick
herself
each time she did so she would groan
with pain the tape recorder would pick
it up and she would switch to the next
knife after nicking herself 10 times
with each knife she would switch on the
second tape recorder whilst replaying
the tape of the first recorder in an
attempt to repeat the same movements
attempting even to replicate the
mistakes with each of the 10 knives
again merging the past with the
present quote
pretty soon i' had gone through all 10
knives and the white paper was stained
very impressively with my blood I rean
the second tape recorder played a double
soundtrack of both
performances then I stood up and left
the crowd stared dead silent and a very
strange feeling came over me something I
had never dreamed of it was as if
electricity was running through my body
and the audience and I had become one a
single organism the sense of danger in
the room had United the onlookers and me
in that moment the here and now and
nowhere
else that thing that each of us loves
with that you are your own little self
privately once you step into the
performance space you are acting from a
higher self and it's not you anymore
it's not the you that you know it's
something
else there on the gymnasium floor
it was as if I'd become at the same time
a receiver and transmitter of huge Tesla
likee energy the fear was gone the pain
was gone I had become Marina whom I
didn't know yet listening to the wild
Applause of the audience I knew I had
succeeded in creating an unprecedented
Unity of time present and time past with
random
errors I had experienced absolute
freedom I felt that my body was without
boundaries
Limitless this was a moment I knew I had
found my
medium end
[Music]
quote following the shock and the
Afterglow she experienced from her first
ever solo performance as Marina
Abramovich with rhythm 10 the last thing
Marina wanted to do was go back to the
more conservative art scene of Belgrade
when the festival was over despite
staying for as long as she could in the
UK working various jobs it would not
last her mother Dena found her a new
teaching job back home and she had to
return to her home country once again
with the freedom she craved as both an
artist and as a person seeming to only
last moments each time during this
particular period of her life life but
her head was still full of ideas for her
next performance projects she continued
to save money with her new well-paid job
in order to fund them in fact she would
even get the chance to perform Riven 10
once again in Rome this time using 20
knives instead of 10 and she would even
receive a bigger reaction from the
audience than before back in
Scotland the more like-minded artists
she begin to meet along a way the more
opportunities seem to arise and the more
support she would receive to materialize
her ideas which would eventually lead
her to begin her next controversial
chapter within the Rhythm series known
as Rhythm 5 quote the five in the title
stood for the five-pointed star for two
stars really there was the large
five-pointed wooden star I planned to
build in the courtyard of a student
cultural center and then there was the
starfish like extremities of my body as
I would lie inside it my head and my
outstretched arms and legs end
quote again Abramovich seemed obsessed
to explore a theme of the body at its
most challenged in the face of danger
and how an audience would interact to a
point when even fellow conceptual
artists were warning her to be careful
or to abandon the idea all together but
nevertheless the project would
continue the performance began with
Abramovich constructing the star made of
wood and wood chips soaked in gasoline
she then lit the star on fire and
proceeded to walk around it she then cut
her hair and threw clumps of it into the
fire then finally she laid down right
inside of a burning star Abramovich
remained in the star for a total of 6
minutes until the Flames eventually
reached her leg the audience then
realized to their Horror in that moment
when when she didn't Flinch as she was
unconscious from a lack of oxygen inside
the burning star the doctors on standby
then stepped in and with the help of the
audience she was rescued from the Flames
that were practically only minutes away
from killing
her one question you may have is why did
Abramovich choose a star as a symbol for
the
performance she would explain herself in
her autobiography titled walk through
walls that the star had always
fascinated her for its many meanings
throughout history within culture and
religion such as with ancient Egypt
paganism and abrahamic religions the
star has always been a significant
symbol with different
interpretations but first and foremost
the star was quite simply a symbol of
Communism and due to her upbringing and
past experiences living in Belgrade it
in turn served as a symbol of Oppression
totalitarianism and of a world that she
was so desperately trying to escape
from despite the near disaster that came
from the performance of Rhythm 5
according to Marina it became quite a
sensational hit not just for the
daringness of the artist and the heroic
acts of the onlookers but mainly for the
symbolic spectacle of the burning star
and the image of a young woman trapped
within it however the overall feeling
Abramovich herself would experience
after the performance was one of bitter
disappointment she later commented upon
this as
follows I was very angry because I then
understood there is a physical limit
when you lose Consciousness you can't be
present you can't
perform End
quotes deeply affected by this new found
realization for a new found medium she
vowed that from now on whatever her next
project would be she would make it her
priority to her body in and out of
Consciousness but without it
interrupting the performance and thus
her next Rhythm project titled Rhythm 2
was
[Music]
conceptualized prompted by a loss of
consciousness in Rhythm 5 Abramovich
devised for two-part Rhythm 2
performance to incorporate a state of
unconsciousness in a
performance she performed the work at
the Museum of Contemporary Art in Zagreb
in
1974 just a few months after Rhythm
5 for this performance Marina had
somehow acquired two types of medication
from a hospital for the first half
lasting roughly 50 minutes she ingested
a form of pill usually prescribed for
cetonia a condition causes extreme motor
immobility in which said pill is
supposed to force catatonic patients to
move the reaction would be extremely
intense within just a few short minutes
Abramovich reacted violently to the
medication experiencing involuntary
muscle movement and even
seizures though unable to control her
body Abramovich remained completely
lucid and could observe what was
happening to her body throughout the
entire AUD
quote I sat at a little table in front
of the audience and took pill number one
in a couple of minutes my body was
jerking around involuntarily almost
falling out of my chair I was aware of
what was happening to me but there was
nothing I could do to stop it end
quote when the effects of a pill finally
wore off part two of her performance
commenced this time she took the second
pill a medication normally prescribed
for the treatment of extreme aggression
depression and
schizophrenia when this medication took
hold she remained physically unchanged
but she became completely mentally
removed I could not remember the laps
time quote this time I went into a kind
of passive trance sitting there with a
big smile on my face aware of nothing
and this pill took 5 hours to wear off
end
[Music]
quote by now word of this new Reckless
young performance artist named Marina
Abramovich was beginning to spread like
wildfire before long many establishments
across Europe who were open to the
conceptual side of creativity were eager
to see this Daredevil of the art world
for themselves one such place would be
the Galleria diagramma in Milan who
agreed to host Marina's next Rhythm
experiment titled Rhythm
4 in this piece Abramovich kneed alone
and naked in a white room with a high
power industrial fan in front of her as
a video camera rolled the live footage
to an audience in a separate room she
approached the fan slowly pressing her
face against it attempting to breathe in
as much air as possible to push the
limits of her lungs soon after she
passed
out
quote in a couple of minutes the great
torrent of air filling my inside caused
me to lose
Consciousness I had anticipated this but
as with rhythm 2 the point of a piece
had been to show me in two different
states Consciousness and unconscious
ious I knew that I was experiencing new
ways of using my body as a material the
problem was that as with rhythm five I
was perceived to be in danger and while
in the earlier piece the danger had been
real this time it was only perceived the
milang gallery staff fearing for my
well-being rushed in and rescued me it
was not needed it was not intended but
it all became part of a piece end quote
naturally as the attention around
abramovich's exhibitions continued to
grow so would her reputation and back in
Belgrade it was mostly negative for
newspapers and media Outlets spreading
word of her performances would ridicule
and demonize her what she is doing has
nothing to do with art they would say
she's nothing but an exhibitionist and a
masochist she belongs in a mental
hospital as scandalous as a reput ation
appeared to be criticisms such as these
would only continue to grow and reach
beyond our home country and do so for
the rest of Marina's
career though it would be this exact
reaction that would evoke the idea of
her final chapter within a notorious
Rhythm series a piece that contested
stands as the most daring and perilous
performance she has yet done and one of
the most bluntest displays ever produced
in the art world of just how far the the
brutality of human nature can go if
given the
[Music]
chance following the vocal reactions to
her performances still fresh in her mind
Abramovich could not help but wonder
what if instead of deciding what she
would do to herself what would happen if
she let the public decide what to do to
her what would happen if she truly
tested the limits of a relationship
between the performer and the
audience that question would be answered
in studio MOA in Naples Italy with a
piece titled Rhythm zero with an
invitation from a gallery to perform
whatever she wanted Abramovich got to
work the concept as a whole was
relatively simple Marina would stand in
the middle of a room wearing black
trousers and a black T-shirt with the
intention of being the object and the
audience being the
action nearby in front of where
Abramovich was standing she had placed
72 various objects on the table which
seemed to be a perfect mix of objects
that represented either pleasure or pain
these items included but were not
limited to a mirror a feather a fork a
bottle of perfume a whip a shaww an axe
grapes scissors wine needles honey a
carving knife a cake a box of razor
blades lipstick pins sugar and even a
fully working pistol with a single
bullet laying next to it along with
various other things ranging from
utterly harmless to utterly
dangerous the instructions to this per
performance now considered just as
famous as the performance itself were as
follows
instructions there are 72 objects on the
table that one can use on me as desired
performance I am the object during this
period I take full
responsibility duration 6 hours 8:00
p.m. to 2:
a.m. so at 8:00 in the evening the
performance commenced and as the
audience entered they soon gathered
around the table of objects but things
started rather timidly at first perhaps
out of confusion or apprehension of
seeing a strange young woman standing
perfectly still behind a table of
questionable objects the audience during
the first 3 hours of a show would being
quite shy towards Marina she would look
back and comment on the performance as
follows I just stood there staring into
the distance not not looking at anything
or anybody now and then someone would
hand me the rose or drap a Shaw around
my shoulder or kiss me then slowly at
first and then quickly things begin to
happen it was very
interesting end
quote from the available photographs
that could be seen of this event one
thing you may have noticed is that
surrounding Marina in most of these
photos seemed to be predominantly a
crowd of men she would provide more in
it into why this was so as follows for
the most part the women in the gallery
would tell the men what to do to me
rather than do it themselves although
later on when someone stuck a pin into
me one woman wiped the tears from my
eyes for the most part these were just
normal members of the Italian art
establishments and their wives
ultimately I think the reason I wasn't
was because the wives were there end
quote as the evening went on and the
early hours of a morning crept in the
atmosphere inside the gallery was
beginning to grow more Sinister with
each passing minute quote a certain air
of sexuality arose in the room this came
not from me but from the
audience we are in southern Italy where
the Catholic church was so powerful and
there was this strong Madonna or
dichotomy in attitudes towards women end
quote after 3 hours had passed one man
decided to cut her shirt apart with the
scissors and ripped it off her because
Abramovich was staying entirely passive
throughout the whole ordeal people
started manipulating her into various
poses puppeting her in whatever way they
pleased while she was completely exposed
from the waist down as she continued to
stand there someone took the lipstick
and wrote libero meaning I am free on
the mirror and placed it in her hand
someone else took the lipstick shortly
afterwards and wrote end across her
forehead another then took Polaroids of
Marina and stopped them in her hands
like she was holding playing cards from
there things would go from bad to worse
and the atmosphere got increasingly
intense a couple of people then decided
to pick her up and carry her around then
they put her on the table spread her
legs and stuck the knife in the table
close to her
groin then someone started sticking pins
into her another then slowly poured a
glass of water over her head another man
proceeded to cut her neck with a knife
and suck the blood leaving a scar that
Marina still carries to this
day she would also mention one
particular member of the audience that
would affect her the most a man that
eventually approached her standing close
to her for a long period of time and
breathing heavily after a while while
the exact same man would take the bullet
load it into the pistol and put it in
Marina's right hand he then proceeded to
point the pistol towards her neck and
touched the trigger at that very moment
a concerned murmur errupted from the
crowd and someone would have to grab
hold of him causing a scuffle to break
out the man eventually had to be hustled
out of a gallery so that the performance
could continue towards the tail end of a
performance however is where this
experiment would go from extremely
telling of how dangerous the supposedly
normal everyday person could be to what
would happen when that same person would
face the reality of it as Marina
explains quote in fact the audience had
become more and more active as if in a
trance and then at 2 a.m. the gallerist
came and told me that the 6 hours were
up I stopped staring and I looked
directly at the audience the perform
perance is over the galleris said thank
you I looked like hell I was half naked
and bleeding my hair was wet and a
strange thing happened at this moment
the people who were still there suddenly
became afraid of me as I walked towards
them they ran out of a
gallery end
quote when it was all over the galleris
then escorted Marina back to a hotel
where Marina went back to her room
alone despite how exhausted she was her
mind was still racing replaying moments
after moments of the sixh hour long
experience the event had in fact left
her feeling so traumatized and affected
that after a Restless night's sleep she
woke up the next morning to discover
that a streak of her black hair had
turned gray the gallery too would
receive its own after effects of the
event the next day the gallerists
received dozens upon dozens of phone
calls from those who
participated most of which were people
who would apologize profusely for their
actions almost as if they didn't quite
know what had come over them as if
something had taken control of them but
quite simply according to Abramovich
what had happened was human nature
itself and its most Primal and Elemental
it became part of a performance in the
most interactive way possible the art
was now made by both performer and the
audience but the concept was so new to
the audience at night that the
consequences could have easily been far
worse under different
circumstances the limits were tested
just as planned the risks were realized
just as Marina had said but ultimately
the results were far more disturbing
than anyone could have ever predicted
and now both artists and the audience
were deeply conflicted over the
experience as Marina would describe in
her memoirs quote human beings are
afraid of very simple things we fear
suffering We Fear
mortality what I was doing in Rhythm
zero as in all my other performances was
staging these fears for the audience
using their energy to push my body as
far as possible in the process I
liberated myself from my fears and as
this happened I became a mirror for the
audience if I could do it they could do
it too end
quote still married to Nesha palovich
and still sleeping under the same roof
of a strict mother back in belgrad
coming home at 1: p.m. each evening
Abramovich was continuing to grow more
distance from a place of origin and more
so after her eventful performance with
rhythm zero in her mind Abramovich felt
truly nothing belonged to her anymore
within her own country even within her
marriage to her College
sweetheart whenever an opportunity
abroad landed in her lap she would take
it without question traveling anywhere
she could and Performing anything she
could it would seem her Rhythm series
had well and truly kickstarted her
career perhaps in the darkest Direction
possible given the next string of s
projects she would involve herself in
during the early' 70s
it would not be until
1976 when after moving to Amsterdam
Marina would find the most unlikely
companion a complete soulmate of
creativity who would practically help
change the course of Marina's career
forever creating a dramatic story along
the way that would be one of passionate
romance with the most Bittersweet
dissolution
[Music]
in the summer of
1975 following the buzz and uproar that
rippled across the art world with rhythm
zero Marina Abramovich was invited to
Vienna in Austria to perform pieces that
were arguably much darker and much more
graphic than anything she had performed
before yet strangely there isn't much
information on these pieces except for
what Marina herself writes about in her
biography walk through walls in the book
she details a rather Grim performance
that she was involved in conducted by
another controversial conceptual artist
named Herman Niche who was predominantly
Infamous for creating dark and violent
spectacles that often use nude
performers and real blood with an actx
that replicated Unholy and sacrificial
rituals the performance Marina took part
in would be no different quote that
summer Niche staged a performance in a
castle outside Vienna called prit andorf
the piece was to last 24 hours there
were 60 participants including me most
of the others were men some were naked
some were dressed all in white I was
placed on a wooden stretcher naked and
blindfolded and the stretcher was leaned
against a concrete wall as gloomy music
played Niche poured sheep blood and
organs eyes and liver over my belly and
between my legs things got stranger from
there after this had gone on for 12
hours I took off my blindfold and walked
away not that I couldn't take it
physically I just didn't want to be part
of it anymore I understood it was not my
thing it was the enormous amount of
animals blood and the fact that we had
to drink it and that it all took place
in a chapel in the castle it felt like a
kind of black mass or banel it seemed so
negative to me but at bottom it just was
not my story not conceptually or in any
other way end
quote following this Marina chose to
stay in Vienna where she would meet a
Swiss artist named Thomas lips who she
had a brief relationship with mixed with
the profoundly horrific effect of the
Herman Niche performance performance and
the brief fling with Thomas lips
Abramovic then became inspired to
conceptualize her next performance in
Vienna where she would subsequently give
the title Thomas lips or the lips of
Thomas this performance again would have
limited information surrounding it
compared to her other work with only a
few photographs and video clips of the
piece still existing today the most
well-known photograph being that of a
five-pointed star that Marino would
carve onto her stomach Marina would
detail the performance in her biography
as
follows I slowly eat 1 kilo of Honey
with a silver spoon I slowly drink one
liter of red wine out of a crystal glass
I break the glass with my right hand I
cut a five-pointed star on my stomach
with a razor blade I violently whip
myself until I no longer feel any pain I
lie down on a cross made of ice
blocks the heat of a suspended heater
pointed at my stomach causes to cut star
to bleed and the rest of my body behind
to
freeze I remain on the ice cross for 30
minutes until the public interrupts a
piece by removing the ice blocks from
underneath me duration 2
hours end
quote although the spectators according
to ramovic were familiar with
provocative art and performances this
particular piece proved to even be too
much for them after some Spectators
rushed to the stage to cover Marina in
coats and help her off the ice she then
had to be taken to the hospital not for
her wounds from the Whip or the
self-inflicted Stars she cut onto her
stomach but for her right hand that she
had unintentionally gouged when she
broke the wine glass that would need a
great deal of
stitches towards the end of 1975 on
Marina's 29th birthday she received an
invitation to take part in a new
upcoming performance this time in a
gallery in Amsterdam known as the Apple
for the Dutch TV show called build
spruck in early December Abramovich
arrived in Amsterdam to meet the Creator
at the airport who was accompanied by
another individual a German artist who
went by the name of Uli who was to be
Marina's guide and assistant for our
performances at that moment Marina
seemed to be instantly enthralled by him
quote Uli his real name I found out was
Frank U lysen but he never used it was
in his early 30s tall and skinny with
long flowing hair that he tied up in the
back with a pair of Chopsticks a fact
that was immediately interesting to me
because I did my hair the exact same way
but the other interesting interesting
thing was that the two halves of his
face were different the left side was
shaved smooth and powdered with a
plucked eyebrow and light Rouge on his
lips the right side was stubbly and a
little greasy with a normal eyebrow and
no makeup if you saw either side in
profile you would get a completely
different impression masculine on one
side feminine on the other end
quote as she spent time with him in
Amsterdam they would discover quite
surprising similarities to each other
the biggest coincidence being that they
shared the same birthday of November
30th as time went on they spent more
time with each other and began to form
an incredibly passionate romantic
relationship but this ultimately would
only be the beginning of a partnership
that would change both of their lives
quite significantly
[Music]
falling deeply in love with Uli a man
who she truly felt was destined for her
made leaving Amsterdam to once again
return to Belgrade all the more
difficult not to mention that she was
still married to Nesha palovich and
living with her mother it was a
relationship riddled with forbidden
desire and one that would have to be
kept secret for a long time on top of
this she was also forced to resign from
her teaching job due to the emerging
pictures of her Rhythm performances that
would cause a scandal at this stage
Abramovich was left with little choice
but to plan her escape from Belgrade for
good and to live with Uli she packed
light only taking a handful of
belongings with the majority of her
things only being a portfolio of her
work and she secretly left on a train to
Amsterdam not once Looking Back by 1976
not long after Marina's final departure
from Belgrade she and Nesha eventually
divorced not long after moving in
together Marina and Uli realizing more
and more how their perceptions of art
were merged into one with their similar
personalities traits and artistic
backgrounds they began planning
performance art projects together
inspiration for their first ever
collaborative performance came from an
unlikely item in their possession a
Newton's Cradle uif for one was
absolutely fascinated in the motion of
it and the illusion of the ball bearings
essentially transferring energy and
movement to each other therefore the
idea came to them both to do the same to
collide into each other and to merge
their energy into one although the
movements would not be as clean or
precise as a Newton's Cradle Uli Arena
both recognized the beauty in that a
rawness that could be encapsulated by
the project and thus the performance
known as relation in space was
conceptualized quote the idea of this
piece was two naked bodies running and
hitting each other frontally and
increasing the speed for one hour we
really wanted to have this male and
female energy put together and create
something we called that self it was
very important to collaborate and to mix
our ideas together and not ever say to
anybody from whom the idea comes from it
was the mixture that really made sense
to us and created that kind of third
energy field end
quote the performance took place for the
annual Venice BN art event in a
warehouse on the island of Gua in Venice
Italy in front of a few hundred
Spectators microphones were apparently
meticulously positioned in order to
capture the sound of their increasingly
intense collisions which at some stages
would send Marina collapsing to the
floor the idea as a whole was to perform
something that was as minimalist as
possible and according to Abramovich
nothing could be more minimal than two
naked bodies in any empty space and with
the only sound been emitted would be two
bodies slamming into each other as for
the reaction of the audience as well as
their interpretation it was clear that
they could sense Marina and Uli were in
love but this added more mystery to
their somewhat aggressive performance
just who were they exactly why were they
colliding and was there some kind of
hostility in their relationship being
released in this bizarre display these
sorts of questions being projected from
the audience much like many of Marina's
projects up till now was the final
ingredient to complete the
[Music]
work following relation in space Marina
and Uli would make an ambitious decision
they decided they would leave the city
of Amsterdam behind and give up most if
not all of their possessions to
completely focus on their performance
art together they purchased aage ated
iron van which Uli painted black and
they would spend 3 years living and
traveling in it devoting themselves
completely to a nomadic lifestyle free
from all attachments and utterly
dedicated to traveling to multiple
places to perform their projects Marina
would look back on this particular time
of her career as being one of the
happiest periods of her life during
1977 Uli and Marina materialized many
interesting Concepts
all of which would have virtually no
rehearsals nor any particular end goal
all that was planned would be the idea
itself and the place and time to perform
it one of which would be the piece
titled relation and movement this
involved the pair driving their van
inside of a museum for 365 laps a black
liquids oozed from the car forming a
perfect circle the idea was that each
lap represented a year and after 365
laps they quote entered the New
Millennium another piece titled relation
and time they set back to back tied
together by their ponytails for a total
of 16 hours as time went on their hair
would eventually come apart strand by
strand they allowed the public to enter
the room to see if they could use the
energy of a public to push their limits
even further
another well-known piece titled
breathing in breathing out was a
particularly surreal yet very simple
performance and garnered wide attention
in this fuo locked their mouths together
and basically inhaled each other's
exhalations until they had used up all
the available oxygen quote we stuck
cigarette filters in our nostrils to
block the air and we taped little
microphones to our throats we kneel down
facing each other I blew all the air out
of my lungs and Uli breathed in all the
air he could then we clamped our mouths
together and he blew his air into my
mouth then I blew the air back to him as
our mouths stayed fixed together as the
sound of our breathing and then our
gasping was Amplified we exchanged again
and again that one lung full of air
which became less and less oxygen and
more and more carbon di oxide as it was
exhaled time after time after 19 minutes
there was no oxygen left we stopped just
before losing
Consciousness end
quote it would also be during 1977 that
one of Marina abramovich's trademark
performances would first be
conceptualized the piece titled
imponderabilia where Uli and Marina both
completely nuded would stand in a narrow
doorway and in order for the public to
pass to another section of the
exhibition they must squeeze sideways
between them and in doing so choose
which one of them to
face many other performance artists as
the years went by would recreate this
concept to Marina Abramovich
retrospectives I've actually personally
witnessed this myself and what I always
find so interesting is seeing which one
of the two performers a member of a
public chooses to face towards when
passing through the pattern that I
personally began to notice quite often
is normally a woman chose to face the
naked female performer and a man chose
to face the male performer as to why
this is I'm not quite sure perhaps
Society has conditioned people when in
these types of situations to have more
trust in their own gender or that they
feel that to face the naked member of
the opposite sex could be disrespectful
or perverse in some way either way way I
thought it was fascinating to
witness light dark was a performance
that again was creatively simple yet
surreal in
execution Uli and Marina would kneel
opposite each other and begin the
performance by slowly slapping each
other in the face much like relation in
space it began slowly but increased in
Pace as time went on Uli turns his cheek
towards Abramovich when she swipes at
him where Abramovich turns her face away
the performance ends when Abramovich
Ducks her head evading the next slap
according to Uli light dark was supposed
to express the relationship between man
and woman as he explains quote we
expressed the various aspects between
men and women the work wasn't only about
ourselves our relationship made the work
possible but the performances were not a
direct image of our PR private
relationship endend quote Marina too
would comment on the piece saying quote
it is not the pain itself that matters
we never did things for the pleasure of
pain we were looking for a key a way to
break through the body to open something
up which is a desire that comes from
Another Side Of Truth or
reality end
quote in the following year of
1978 Uli and Marina con calized the
bizarre performance known as um ah ah I
guess let's just go with that here they
stood opposite each other and made long
sounds with their mouths open gradually
they would move closer and closer to one
another until eventually they would yell
directly into each other's open mouths
[Music]
oh the performance would last 15 minutes
by the time both artists voices would
end up out of sink and failing from a
continuous yelling
the purpose of his piece was to
demonstrate their interest in endurance
and duration as well as exploring
aggression between physically present
figures one male and one female not too
dissimilar from the concept of the light
dark
performance but one project and
performance art by Marina and Uli from a
certain point of view would be a call
back to a much earlier performance of
marinas her Infamous Rhythm Zero
Performance back in Italy was without a
doubt an experiment of surrendering
complete and utter trust to the audience
in order to complete the artwork but
when it came to the 1980 performance of
rest energy this time she would offer
her trust and vulnerability entirely to
her lover Uli although only lasting 4
minutes Marina would look back on this
performance as one of the hardest pieces
she's ever had to do quote I was not in
charge in rest energy we actually held
an arrow on the weight of our bodies and
the arrow was pointed right into my
heart we had two small microphones near
our hearts so we could hear our
heartbeats as our performance was
progressing heartbeats were becoming
more and more intense and though it
lasted Just 4 minutes and 10 seconds I'm
telling you for me it was forever it was
a performance about complete and total
trust end quote
whether audiences loathed or admired
them Marina and Uli seemed to have been
successful in their goal to bring
something new and unexpected to the art
World their ambition to let go of their
individual egos to instead merge
together to manifest one creative
personality was accomplished and sitting
on the summit of a performance art scene
but as the years went by a pattern was
beginning to form for whatever reason in
spite of their admirable ability to work
seamlessly as a Duo the attention of the
audience was gradually beginning to
shift focus more towards marinaa than
Uli when the media press and art
magazines would talk about their
performances most would mention
Abramovich first and in some cases they
would leave out Uli alog together
talking only of Marina or mistaking Uli
to be her assistant rather than her
counterpart in the
performances regardless the couple
continued to perform together throughout
the 1980s the most well-known work
during this period would be a series of
22 performances that took place between
1981 and
1987 in 19 locations across a number of
continents titled night sea Crossing
during the performances ulai and the
ramovic sat completely still and in
silence at either end of a table facing
each other in relation to this project
would be the work displayed beside it
known as conjunction which was deeply
inspired by Marina's growing interest in
spirituality particularly Tibetan
Buddhism and the time she and Uli spent
in Australia coming face to face with
Aboriginal culture which according to
Abramovich was an experience that proved
to be one of her most transformative
quote we chose this culture for many
reasons first it's nomadic the second
this culture doesn't have possessions
it's the culture where we always believe
in the idea of here and now which is
exactly what performance is about and
the third thing is that their entire
life is the ceremony and this piece
conjunction was really historically
important because it was the first time
ever that an aborigin and a Tibetan Lor
physically ever met we decided to
construct a very large table covered
with 24 karat gold leaves and at that
table Uli and I are sitting in the
western position and opposite the table
is a Tibetan llama and a high deegree
medicine man sitting in a cross-legged
position we are there sitting 4 days and
7 hours a day just sitting in a
meditative State end quote things did
did not seem to improve in the
relationship between Marina and Uli
however although still deeply caring for
each other they were distancing further
from each other their passion was
beginning to wear thin and tensions only
seemed to rise the effect their success
was having on each of them was also
drastically different Uli never really
cared that much for the lifestyle of
fame or for being in such a spotlight
being a lifelong Anarchist who enjoyed
Solitude he began rebelling against what
he saw as a growing commercialization of
their work Marina however was growing
weary of the poor struggling artist's
life and welcomed growing success sure
enough by 1988 they would make a
spiritual journey that would ultimately
Mark the end of a passionate and intense
relationship an art stunt which at the
time had never even been seen before
named lovers the great
wallwalk what would make this project so
Bittersweet would not just be the fact
that it might be end of their
partnership and relationship but the
fact that it was originally planned for
many years prior in 1983 when they
proposed to be the first people to walk
the entire distance of a Great Wall of
China the famous ancient Monument
originally built as a defense against
Invaders from the north and west of the
country setting off alone from opposite
ends they planed to meet right in the
middle where they intended to marry each
other the concept exhilarated them both
the idea was so Grand and even in their
early stages of planning bestun Marina
especially knew that it would be nothing
short of historic the couple visualized
themselves walking alone across the
dramatic Landscapes of China camping
under the stars and romantically
concluding their journey through wedlock
they envisioned lovers as not just a
great journey to celebrate their love
and commitment for each other but also
an art display in which they would be
both the performers and the
audience however it would be no simple
feat to
accomplish initially the authorities of
Beijing reportedly struggled to grasp o
Marina's motivs for their Excursion
performance art especially of their
style and caliber was practically
unheard of in China to them it seemed
rather Preposterous to camp and walk
along the great historical monuments for
a quote unquote art project not to
mention get married on it regardless
after many years of push back they were
finally granted permission when they
both agreed to participate in a film of
their quote study of a great wall for
Chinese Central television but by then
their relationship had completely
dissolved in spite of this however they
decided to pursue their plans and go
ahead with a stunt changing the
narrative from one of marriage to one of
Separation The Long War work began for
them on March 30th
1988 Abramovich set off westwards from
the dragon's head at the bodai sea an
extension of the Yellow Sea between
China and the Korean Peninsula dressed
in baggy red clothes she was according
to an informative article by the
guardian on The Lover's stunt given the
nickname P Taj meaning big fat sister
mother as for Uli he began his journey
5,000 kilm west of Abramovich starting
his walk at the dragon's taale in the
GOI desert the walk proved to be
incredibly grueling with both artists
covering a distance of approximately
2,500 kilm over a period of 90 days
Abramovich walking most of her journey
through mountainous regions of China
came across many difficult and
inaccessible paths at one point on her
fourth day after slipping on some rocks
Abramovich and her guy found themselves
nearly falling to their
deaths of course both artists would also
see amazing sights along the way such as
locals who had built homes and Stables
into sections of a winding wall who
would also assist them on their travels
and share stories and legends about the
land many of these crowds from the
surrounding towns and Villages
fascinated in the artists silently
followed them wherever they went in one
settlement villagers even gathered
around around and watched Abramovich as
she
slept finally on a stone bridge Uli and
Abramovich met at Center Marina would
quote on the experience as
follows that walk became a complete
personal drama Uli started from a [__]
desert and I from a Yellow Sea after
each of us walked 2,500 km we met in the
middle and said goodbye we needed a
certain form of ending after walking as
huge distance towards each other it is
very human it is in a way more dramatic
more like a film ending because in the
end you really are alone whatever you do
end
quote despite the Chinese press a group
of musicians and even a fireworks
display being prepared for the couple
upon the climax of their Journey there
would be no wedding ceremony they simply
took part in a press conference together
in Beijing then they returned separately
to Amsterdam and would not speak nor see
each other again for 22
[Music]
years although one big chapter of her
life had now ended with Uli another very
significant interest was now fueling
Marina which was finding her sense of
deep and personal spirituality
particularly within nature and the
unknown during her hike on the Great
Wall she spoke of how she felt that the
metals in the ground influenced her mood
and her state of being she also pondered
on the Chinese myths that she was told
by the locals in which the Great Wall
had been described as quote a dragon of
energy but even before lovers during the
1980s Abramovich had deeply immersed
herself into betan Buddhism studying and
meditating at monasteries which would
later profoundly impact her
understanding of the Mind Body
Connection and the potential for
Transcendence through artistic
expression but rather than following one
spiritual path such as Buddhism
exclusively Marina spirituality is not
confined to any particular religious
Dogma rather it is a synthesis of
various influences that she has
encountered throughout her life her
performances often serve as a form of
spiritual exploration pushing the
boundaries of herself self and inviting
the audience to engage with their own
spiritual
Dimensions such as allowing the audience
to step into shoes made of crystals for
a 1991 art piece titled shoes for
departure in order to encourage a
certain State of Mind from the
participants quote I have instructions
for the public to take off your shoes
and with naked feet put on the two
crystal shoes close your eyes don't move
and make your
departure I'm talking about a mental not
physical departure so the public can
enter certain states of Mind helped by
the material itself material is very
important for me I use crystals human
hair copper iron the materials already
have a certain energy and
quotes her Fascination in meditation
taught in Tibetan Buddhism as well as
the profound spiritual connection she
developed for the natural world would
only continue to reach New Heights
throughout the 1990s and Kickstart many
new Concepts in fact by 1995 when she
was organizing her piece titled cleaning
the mirror this would be directly
inspired by toet and death rights that
prepar disciples to become one with
their own mortality clean the mirror is
a series of related performances and
video installations that explore themes
of mortality impermanence and the
purification of the Soul Abramovich sits
on a chair with a complete human
skeleton on her lap a bucket of soapy
water stands beside her for several
hours she meticulously scrubs the bones
with a floor brush cleaning away the
dirt and grime that has accumulated on
the bones over time the performance is
both physically and emotionally
demanding abramovich's face is often
stained with concentration and her
movements are slow and
deliberate the sound of a brush scraping
against the bones is Amplified creating
a sense of raw
intimacy as Abramovich cleans the
skeleton it gradually becomes whiter and
more luminous this could be seen as a
metaphor for the cleansing of a soul or
the process of facing one's own
mortality
the dirt that is removed from the bones
could represent the negative aspects of
the self such as fear anger ignorance
pride and
attachment what makes it more
interesting is that in cleaning the
skeleton Marina then becomes the one
covered in dirt symbolizing the
transference of these negative qualities
almost like a sacrifice for the benefit
of the
skeleton but in truth cleaning the
mirror can be interpreted in many
different ways some viewers see it as a
meditation on death While others see it
as a call to live each moment to the
fullest for Abramovich though the
skeleton represents quote the last
mirror we will all face in a work
dominated by death and
transience this would not be the only
time skeletons would appear in her
performances though for example later on
in her career she would conceptualize
her type of self-portrait before
performance titled nude with skeleton
which evokes a traditional exercise
undertaken by Tibetan Monks during which
they slept and meditated alongside the
dead in various states of Decay through
this practice they gain an understanding
of a process of death and
impermanence quote in different periods
of my life I made several Works using a
skeleton I construct the skeleton of my
own size and a lie posing the Skeleton
on my body by breathing slowly the
skeleton gets animated and moves
together with me the work is really
about facing your own mortality it's
about fear of pain and fear of dying
it's something that in our life we all
fear the most and again in my own work I
always like to confront these fears so
being close to the skeleton washing it
carrying it breathing through it looking
at it and confronting it it's the way to
deal with that fear end
[Laughter]
quote in keeping within the concept of
bones in the act of cleaning them
another one of Marina's most famous
works of the '90s would be her piece
titled balcan Barack first conducted in
1997 in Venice
Italy but before we can truly attempt to
comprehend the concept of this
particular piece we need to look at what
exactly inspired it or rather what
exactly it
memorializes between 1992 and
1995 a brutal and tragic conflict
unfolded in former Yugoslavia
specifically in the multiethnic Republic
of Bosnia and hert cenia it was a
complex War fueled by ethnic tensions
and the breakup of Marina's former
country of Yugoslavia with devastating
consequences for the country and its
people following a referendum on Bosnian
Independence Bosnian serbs declared
their own State and an armed conflict
erupted Serb forces backed by the
Yugoslav People's Army laid Siege to
major cities like Saro and launched a
fences to capture territory the war was
marked by horrific acts of ethnic
cleansing where Serb forces
systematically expelled or killed
bosniacs and croats from areas they
claimed the sanit massacre in
1995 where thousands of bosniac men and
boys were murdered became a chilling
symbol of the war's
barbarity the International Community
initially struggled to respond
effectively to the conflict however as
the atrocities mounted NATO air strikes
against Ser positions in 1995 helped
turn the tide of the war that same year
the Dayton Accords were signed bringing
an official end to the war the agreement
established a complex power sharing
system for Bosnia and hovenia divided
into two entities the Federation of
Bosnia and hovenia dominated by the
bosniacs and the croats and the Republic
of cska
although the war ended the Bosnian War
left deep scars on the land and its
people over 100,000 lives were lost and
millions were displaced the war also
exposed the dangers of ethnic
nationalism and the importance of
international cooperation in preventing
such conflicts it's important to
remember the Bosnian War not only for
its tragic events but also as a stark
reminder of the fragility of peace and
the need for tolerance and understanding
in the diverse world that we live in
naturally Marina Abramovich would be one
of the many figureheads who would be
deeply affected by the
conflict quote when the war started in
Bosnia it was such a difficult time for
me I was not there I'd been living for
such a long time outside the country and
I remember so many artists immediately
reacting and making work and protests on
the horrors of that war and I remember
that I could not do anything it was too
close to me I went to Belgrade and I
interviewed my mother my father and a
man who caught rats for 35 years of his
life there are a few things happening in
this installation his positioned so the
hands of my father my father with a
pistol my mother's fist showing empty
hands and then with crossed hands on her
eyes and then it's me first as a doctor
telling the story of the Rat catcher and
then as a sexy dancer dancing to a
Hungarian
chadash and in the meantime there's a
huge pile of bones which during the
entire performance I'm sitting and
washing it was summer in Venice very
very hot and after a few days already
worms started coming out of the bones
and the smell was
unbearable the whole idea that by
washing bones and trying to scrub the
blood is impossible you can't wash the
blood from your your hands as you can't
wash for shame from the war but also it
was important to transcend it that can
be used this image for any War anywhere
in the
world end quote this personally for me
is my favorite performance of marinas I
remember seeing a retrospective of this
at the Royal Academy in London and just
being completely overwhelmed with
emotions I remember staring at the pile
of bones for a vast length L of time
whilst listening to Marina's voice in
the background and let me tell you it
hits you deep like nothing you can
imagine and I felt it was true what she
said although directly manifested from
the horrors of a Bosnian war in truth
this pieace encapsulates for Horrors
brutality and Insanity of practically
any War making it such a universally
powerful artwork ultimately many people
were proven to have felt the same way
this installation earned Abramovich for
Golden Lion award at the Venice Bay that
[Music]
year at the turn of a new millennium
Marina Abramovic at this stage appeared
to be revisiting a Grassroots concept of
hers that arguably served as one of the
main factors that shoved her career into
the Global Spotlight from the very
beginning which was an intimate and
close interaction between herself and
the
audience throughout the 2000s Marina
were conceptualized installations that
would deepen the connection between
herself and The Spectators in the wake
of the tragedy of 9/11 and 2001 she
began working on a piece titled the
house with an ocean view in the
following year that according to her
served as a means to immerse both
herself and the audience in a sort of
purifying energy as explained by her
quote house with an ocean view was for
me an experiment when I came to New York
it was just after September 11th and I
found New York had changed so much I
found New York and people living there
different more emotional more vulnerable
more
spiritual the idea of the work was an
experiment if I purify myself without
eating for 12 days any kind of food just
drinking pure water and being in the
present moment here and now in the three
units of the wall which represents my
house like the bathroom the living room
and the sleeping room where the ladder
coming down to the space is made of
knives so you can never leave that kind
of rig ous way of living and
purification would do something to
change the environment and to change the
attitude of people coming to see me if
they will just come and stay and forget
about the time I had in this period
people who came just for a few minutes
and then stayed for 3 hours 4 hours and
came the next day to stay even longer
without really understanding what's
happening but there's something like I
almost think that if you are in the
present moment moment you are purified
and that you can create a kind of energy
field that you can charge on an atomic
level of space in a certain way with the
public and feel and just be in the
present time end
quote however one groundbreaking
durational piece that seemed to capture
the most intimacy between herself and
the audience as well as receive the most
worldwide attention in recent years was
between March 14th to May 31st in 2010
at the Museum of Modern Art in New York
for 3 months she sat Motionless in a
chair inviting visitors to take the
opposite seat and silently engage with
her gaze titled the artist is present
the performance became a landmark event
in Contemporary Art sparking profound
emotional connections and raising
questions about human presence
vulnerability and connection
quote I have the empty chair so
everybody from the audience can come on
their free time and sit in front of me
and engage in this kind of Silence
experience of the here and now the
present moment so you can observe this
as kind of a stage for the experience or
you can really enter that space and take
active participation which actually
brings you much closer to the artist and
this presence and to your own experience
if you sit on this chair opposite me
it's extremely important to actually
find a very comfortable position and you
don't move just sit motionless and see
what happens if we connect our eyes and
I really think that is going to be
something quite special to go into this
unknown territory because of the energy
coming from the audience I have to be
the transmitter and receiver at the same
time that energy just goes through me
and to be ready for the next visitor and
the next one and the next one end
quote of course each encounter was
unique from person to person some simply
stared some smiled some would burst into
tears and one woman as seen in the
artist's present documentary would even
attempt to strip naked before sitting
opposite her but would subsequently be
escorted out by security for those who
did set opposite her though what's
fascinating to see is that Abramovich
would completely mirror the expressions
and emotions of her sitters for example
if someone would cry she too would start
crying sharing that exact same emotion
together in an incredible moment of
oness understandably though due to the
nature of the peace that CS could choose
the duration of time spent with Marina
with some sitting for just a few minutes
and others up to an entire day this made
tension within the sometimes endless
queue of people difficult to control at
times almost being a call back to the
raw public energy captured within her
Rhythm Zero
Performance by the end of it Abramovich
sat across
1,545 Sitters in total including an
impressive list of celebrities such as
James Franco Lou Reed Alan Rickman Jami
mckirk Jennifer Carpenter Orlando Bloom
and Bor however one of the earliest
sitters during the retrospective that
were gone a viral attention would be
none other than Uli
himself after many years of not seeing
each other ever since the Great Wall of
China Uli arrived unannounced at the
Museum he would sit down opposite Marina
as she looked up and opened her eyes to
see who was sitting opposite her the
moment captured between them both is
quite simply so powerful the
overwhelming Joy they both have for
seeing each other again is quite clear
to see and he can't help but feel moved
by this moment is worth remembering this
is a woman who went through Rhythm zero
despite being cut threatened abused and
nearly shot with a loaded gun but to see
ooli again was the moment that broke her
putting that into perspective really
does show the care that they still had
for each other back then it's just a
shame that Uli and Marina then got into
a messy Royal ities dispute no more than
5 years later like talk about a
Bittersweet relationship but in any case
the artist's presence remains a pivotal
moments in contemporary art history it
continues to be celebrated for its raw
emotional power its exploration of human
connection and it's challenge to the
conventions of artistic practice and one
that Marina claim changed her life
entirely by the end of it
[Laughter]
[Music]
so I want to end this documentary by
talking about something that I know is
going to get a lot of mixed opinions
although at this point is fair to say
that Marina Abramovic was not one to shy
away from controversy or incredibly bold
ideas for her performances and in spite
of the boundaries she had already pushed
even earlier on in her career nothing
would be quite as divisive and
Incredibly outlandish as her provocative
performance that I've not yet mentioned
known is Spirit cooking conceived in
1996 always got to save a best till last
Eh this particular project began with an
idea for a book a cookbook to be precise
that would be a collaborative effort
between her and printer publisher Jacob
Samuel in an Amsterdam
Studio as explained on the Museum of
Modern Art websites quote the artist
chose to make a cookbook writing a
series of aphrodiziac recipes that serve
as a vocative instructions for actions
or thoughts to allow the artist to
create the accompanying etches in a
manner consistent with a body oriented
practice Samuel prepared the plates with
a soft ground so she could scratch
directly on the surface with her
fingernails and encouraged her to work
with spit bit using her own saliva with
nitric acid to paint on the plate end
quote these quote unquote aphrodiziac
recipes were essentially playfully
provocative poems by Abramovich inspired
by the popular folk belief that ghosts
feed off intangible things like light
sound and
emotions Jacob Samuel would comment on
the concept as follows in 1994 I
designed a portable Studio that I could
put in a crate and ship all over the
world so I could work with artists in
their own Studios I wanted to be able to
work with artists in their own
environment and see where that would
lead Marina was very open to whatever I
suggested in terms of technique but
right away I could see that she had a
very specific working process because
she's a performance artist and because
she uses her body for everything she was
a little uncomfortable drawing with a
pencil or an etching needle so I
suggested that we use soft ground and
that she draw with her fingernails and
occasionally she would use her
fingerprints she used bit bite aquatint
which he like to use because it actually
mixes the artist's saliva with nitric
acid so again is related to her body
this is exactly what I hoped would
happen by creating a portable Studio
that the artists would be so in tune
with their own environment that
translating it into another physical
context would be
irrelevant end quote so if it's just
supposed to be a fantasy cookbook
consisting of Make Believe recipes pie
what exactly provokes so much
controversy compared to our other work
well if we take a look at a few examples
you'll quickly notice that some of these
are extremely bizarre and at times
straight up grotesque ranging from
eating nine red hot peppers whilst
facing a wall to and I'm not even
kidding here mixing fresh breast milk
with fresh sperm milk so to someone
completely unfamiliar with Marina's
outlandish creative personality it's
clear to see how this would be quite
shocking to the unsuspecting ey but the
project would not just end there in the
following year of
1997 Abramovich conducted a multimedia
Spirit cooking installation at a gallery
in Rome Italy where she would write
strange instructions and recipes in
Pig's blood all over the White Walls of
a showroom phrases included things like
spin around until you lose Consciousness
try to eat all the questions of the day
or saliva of your lover mixed with mour
Jew collected from eucalyptus leaves
would just be a few examples now again
given what we know of her work in the
past this is pretty shocking and
gruesome but relatively nothing out of
the ordinary when it comes to Abramovich
and a grand scheme of things with a
great deal of context removed I can
certainly see how this would look
barbaric and I guess I'll use that word
now satanic but the fact is if you
really want to find out why this receiv
receives so much backlash I'm afraid
that will involve going down a
conspiracy theory rabbit hole and I hate
to break it to you but this is an art
Channel not a conspiracy theory Channel
there's also a lot of American politics
involved with the conspiracy as well and
well have you heard my accent American
politics is not exactly my strong suit
either so that's really as far as I
would go for this one I'm afraid
obviously people are completely entitled
to think what they will when it comes to
this particular work of hers
like I said I can completely understand
why this would provoke such a reaction
I'm sure if she decided to put on more
nice sounding recipes like mix gumdrops
with daisies and feed off for happiness
and it was all written in sugar icing
I'm pretty sure no one would even bat an
eyelid but if you're watching this video
expecting to hear what I personally
think I honestly have no other opinion
other than well yeah it's Marina
Abramovich it doesn't exactly surprise
me that she would work on something like
this do I share her beliefs or her
perspectives no whether or not she's a
Satanist or a witch whatever word you
want to use quite frankly that's none of
my business my focus on this channel is
on the artwork itself and whatever
proven reliable facts are available for
me to research from if you like
conspiracies that's totally fine but I
personally don't consider these things
to be reliable sources of information
I'm sorry if one day it comes out that
Marina is confirmed Beyond reasonable
doubt that she is more shall we say
morally questionable than we initially
thought then I guess we'll cross that
bridge when we get to it but for now all
I see Marina Abramovich as is an
extremely blunt raw outrageous
provocative and controversial
performance artist that not everybody is
going to love but here's the thing if we
lived in a world where every solitary
thing was objectively something to like
or hate just what kind of existence
would that be the world has never been
neat little boxes and categories and to
think otherwise is simply unrealistic
and that's the true beauty of art is one
of the few things we've created as a
species that points out these kind of
complexities of life because art is
Limitless and doesn't have to have rules
I would absolutely be lying if I said I
like every project Abramovich has
conducted though I'll be honest I'm not
even sure I fully get her or agree with
her most of the time sometimes I think
she does go too far sometimes I do do
feel like some of her performances are
just exploitative or self-deprecation on
display sometimes I think the way she
treats people is completely selfish and
insensitive based on what I've read in
her book sometimes I think her art isn't
my idea of art at all but let me ask you
something whether you love her or
absolutely despise her can you honestly
say regardless of how you feel about her
that she hasn't had some kind of impact
on you in my eyes if that's not the
result of a successful artist and I
don't know what it is I think
performance art is one of those
anomalies within creativity that's
always going to get very split reactions
don't get me wrong I've seen some
terrible performance art and I too pick
and choose what constitutes real art
based on my own experiences and personal
tastes but that's exactly my point there
should never be a definitive answer
within art it's just like music Just
because you don't like a certain genre
of music that doesn't necessarily mean
the genre is definitively bad or if I
don't like a certain type of food again
just because I have different
preferences that doesn't mean that the
chef who cooked it is all of a sudden
bad at cooking I know it seems like an
obvious thing to say but I can't help
but feel when it comes to this certain
genre of Contemporary Art but people
tend to forget this side of things and
Marina Abramovich is an artist who I
don't think I'll ever truly be able to
fully wrap my head around I find it
fascinating but even going to her
retrospective at the Royal Academy left
me feeling both inspired and on the
other hand feeling like okay what the
[__] did I just witness but having said
that I can't think of another experience
in art quite like it so I absolutely
considered that noteworthy in conclusion
then despite the criticisms and
controversies the legacy of Marina
Abramovich remains undeniable she's
challenged her understanding of art
pushed the boundaries of human
performance and fostered profound
moments of connection between artists
and audience many times almost
effortlessly her work continues to
inspire awe and introspection drawing in
huge crowds of people worldwide sparking
huge debates of course all ensuring her
place as one of the most influential
artists presently alive today whether
For Better or For Worse she's been
relatively quiet with new ideas in
recent years mostly leaving it to a
hardworking new generation of
performance artists from her Marine
Abramovic Institute but it will be
interesting to see how both her most
loyal fans and her most passionate
haters will react to whatever she has
next in
[Music]
store thank you for watching this video
I hope you found this documentary
interesting as always a huge thank you
to all of my patrons and channel members
here's a special shout out to all of my
top tier
donators Leslie Simon lorri Gallardo
Port Pera miles Z gra Vlad ziv Tyler
Butler Eric Lam marker Dave MC molale
H's Place
eok Lee Flowers Calvin Kai the new on
gone 24 a Kaiser Charlie sanesi Ken B
and Carol
H that's all for me this time thanks
again for watching see you in the next
one soon keep being creative and bye for
now